[Music]
this week on marketplace getting posed
at the pumps nearly chest
are we being misled into spending
millions we don't have to which gas is
better for my car okay
wasting money on gas most of our cars
don't need oil companies are misleading
drivers absolutely
we put premium gas to the test and you
won't believe what we find it's actually
hurting the environment why are they
selling people a kind of gas that they
don't need we're cruising along the back
roads of southwestern Ontario
it's the marketplace cash challenge
premium versus regular which one will
come out on top
stay tuned for the lowdown on
high-octane
[Applause]
no matter what you put in your tank the
price across the country is high too and
for premium
well you pay a premium as much as
fifteen cents more per litre than
regular we're at a gas station in
Toronto's East End how you doing good
asking couple questions gauging your gas
buying habits what do you know about
premium gas supposed to make it run
better right brake cleaner supposed to
be better for your car in terms of I
know some additives or something that
they put as like this seem to drive that
home
shell v-power our most advanced fuel
ever making the pitch that premiums
better for your car nitrogen enriched
for optimum performance maximum
protection now it's true that some car
makers recommend putting premium fuel in
their high-end models but what about
most of us who drive regular cars do you
ever buy premium gas sometimes a car did
what snowball I do like to because they
say it's better for the car who says
yeah I don't know I guess just other
people have worked at the gas stations
and stuff have told me over the years
it's better function this would be sane
did it require premium you're correct I
mean it's supposed to be better for the
part
it's a treat I get extra money I think
will help with the premium today
treating body and mind with care is at
the center of coruña Brandis life she
teaches yoga out of her home in East End
Toronto a believer in the holistic
approach even when it comes to buying
gas as we learn when we first meet here
at the pumps putting higher octane gas
into her Honda Civic on the higher on
the higher octane what what have you
heard about premium gas I'm a yogi eco
person so in my mind I don't know if
it's true or not but in my mind I
believe it's true that if I buy earth if
I buy the higher grade gas it burns
cleaner is she right we want to find out
if premium gas really does all those
wonderful things so we're doing three
tests with a regular car does it run
better go farther for a cleaner with
premium
the choice for our first experiment is
shells premium v-power we're using this
2013 Chevrolet Cruze one of the
best-selling passenger cars in Canada
and our lab if you like is the Canadian
automotive and trucking Institute in
Cambridge Ontario party Stan fel is
running our tests he's been an
instructor here for more than 20 years
how'd I do that's great thanks hey Marty
Tom Harrington hey Tom how are you
thanks for helping us out today we're
and welcome ok let's see we're testing
premium versus regular gas that's right
what will this machine do what this
machine is gonna do is we're going to
measure the performance of the car by
measuring the horsepower and the torque
and see if there's any difference
between regular fuel and premium fuel so
what do you need me to do I'm going to
strap down the car and then I need you
to do 50 kilometres an hour okay and put
it on the cruise control and we'll get
some numbers here great let's do that
our first test is looking at performance
does the engine run better on premium we
start by running the chevy cruze on
regular gas what is this telling us
about how the engine is performing on
regular gas was telling us right now is
that his taking this amount of
horsepower to make these wheels turn and
using up that much fuel we have our
reading with the regular time to switch
over now to the premium fuel yeah I was
gonna say you fill er up
they kept it empty it good point done
that before so we drained the regular
gas and put in the shell v-power premium
we have premium gas in the car now so
you expect any of those numbers to
change I'm thinking this number here is
gonna drop I'm not too sure about this
number but I'm thinking this number here
is gonna come in at a lower number and
if it's a lower number that means what
that means that the engines running more
proficiently and doesn't need as much
power to make it run the same speed okay
because of the high test fuel
what are we seeing we've seen the same
numbers as before that's very
interesting
what do you make of it shouldn't the
premium be lower number you would think
what does that tell you I think what's
happening here
with the premium fuel running through
here the computer of the car is
compensating for that and it's going to
give you the same numbers because that's
what that engine was designed to do so
proficiency and efficiency of the car by
putting in premium or its desired
regular octane it's negligible you won't
see a difference that's right our test
shows our regular car does not run
better on premium car talk has been mark
Winton second language since he was a
boy today he's an automotive teacher and
writes a blog on the car industry Mark's
also an expert witness on car cases in
Ontario Superior Court what's your
recommendation to people about what gas
to use railer always one of the things
about premium is that it makes your
engine perform better true or false
no it's that's false how many would even
notice the difference between the two
nobody I mean you could blindfold me I
couldn't tell the difference we asked
mark to put his mileage where his mouth
is he gets the keys to the Chevy Cruze
for our second time we want to see if
our car gets better mileage on premium
this time we're using esos supreme set
trip to zero resetting gas
and off we go
[Music]
I expect the results to be very very
close within a half a liter 400 Colossus
[Music]
and stop five liters is that 1.8 liters
tell me about the results in basically
what you're seeing I don't see any
difference at all any variance you would
get would be due to just a testing
variance just at between the the
equipment itself it's tolerances the car
itself its tolerances that's it you're
not seeing any real-world difference is
there any benefit at all to putting
premium in a regular car no and then
whatsoever I don't know how to put it
even plainer than that that mark doesn't
just talk the talk he drives the drive
remember that muscle car he likes to
take for a spin on a nice day
well GM may recommend premium but mark
puts regular in the tank if I was gonna
go to say a racetrack or something
definitely I would pre me in the car but
just driving around to and fro don't
need it not required they talk about the
idea of the engine knocks if you're not
putting in the right kind of gas - have
you ever noticed I didn't like that one
with your bed no modern cars have a lot
of engine management technology that
Tunes a car while you drive and so if
you put in a regular grade fuel and the
engine does not before you hear it the
engine will change the timing and get
rid of the Nok how much money have you
saved do you think dobo Timbuk Safilo
mark isn't a lone wolf on this none
other than the US government agrees with
it the Federal Trade Commission the FTC
says using a higher octane gas than your
owner's manual recommends won't make
your car perform better go faster get
better mileage or run cleaner and unless
your engine is knocking is a waste of
money back at the gas station how will
car owners react
so it shouldn't be 15 cents more leader
right now
that's that are getting this with the
thinking that it's better for our cars
and really do you think gas stations or
companies are misleading drivers about
premium gas I think so oh yeah
absolutely
in the u.s. the FTC says the same thing
it's gone after some companies for
misleading advertising esos parent
company Exxon agreed to run new
commercials after giving drivers in the
u.s. the wrong impression about premium
[Music]
so what's the sales pitch here we're
taking our hidden cameras to gas
stations across Canada and find out
there's a premium on accuracy
91% pain we're pulling up to the pumps
and putting claims about premium gas to
the test the American government and
many experts are warning drivers not to
waste their money on premium so we take
our hidden cameras to gas stations and
Halifax Toronto and Vancouver will they
make the pitch for premium and a regular
car what would you recommend should I
get the premium or their regular some
seem to give the correct advice but
others say premium is king should I get
regular or premium premiums better which
gas is better for my car
[Applause]
okay and one of the reasons they're
telling us to go with premium over
regular better mileage in a car that
doesn't need it and a claim experts say
is simply not true
the oil companies pump up another claim
about premium clean can mean all kinds
of things
Esso scientists have engineered gasoline
on the molecular level to help clean up
intake valves and help deliver better
fuel economy but to the oil companies
clean is all about the detergents they
put in their gas and they sell it like
other people sell laundry soap better
petro Canada goes so far as to call its
gas regular clean and super clean our
expert mark Winton says time to come
clean on this one I've noticed that
they're making everybody think their
engines are dirty and they need to be
cleaned and then if you clean them
you'll get better performance and things
you know ideas today stay pretty clean I
mean it's a bit of a fallacy to think
always we have you know hundreds of
thousands engines running around they're
all gunked up that need cleaning
I mean it's simply not the case and all
the other gases their regular gases have
detergents as well as mandated by law
the FTC agrees on that one to high
octane gasoline does not outperform
regular octane in preventing edge and
deposits from forming and removing them
or in cleaning your car's engine in fact
the US Environmental Protection Agency
requires that all octane grades of all
brands of gasoline contain engine
cleaning detergent additives we have the
same rules for Canadian guests
there's another premium promise that you
hear from the oil companies that premium
gas is kinder and gentler for the
environment this is the yield
remember our yoga instructor Karuna
brandy believes in tending to and
protecting the earth so even though
Honda recommends regular Karuna puts in
premium gas because she believes it
causes less pollution time to clear the
air
our third and final test is on emissions
we're back at the Canadian automotive
and trucking Institute where Marty
stanfeld gets a reading with regular gas
parts per million of hydrocarbons that's
a very clean car the overall tells us
what this tells us is this a very clean
running gas with the clean running part
now out with the regular and in with
shell v-power premium and the difference
to be expected again I'm hoping to see
lower numbers here not because the
premium fuel is both be a cleaner
burning fuel I step on the gas and what
did the readings say this time hazal
carbons are up a little bit which means
is unburnt fuel coming out of the
tailpipe because we're compensating and
the premium feels not getting used up
like it should in a premie fuel car so
therefore it's actually hurting the
environment whether or not you're
cleaning your valves and cleaning the
inside of the engine I I couldn't say
that's true but I think you are hurting
more the environment now by running the
premium fuel in a regular fuel cart we
show the test results to Karuna what'd
you think of that I'm speechless why I
think I'm doing this is because of the
opposite of that thinking that I'm being
cleaner as a driver and then I have a
question because why are the oil
companies making these different grades
of gas and is it an education for us as
consumers and who do we trust time to
find out
we're taking our test car to each of the
big three gas stations will they tell us
to put in premium and we ask the
companies why so much fiction at the
pump companies are not putting these
millions of dollars into research just
for the fun of it it is well to try to
make money our marketplace gas challenge
shows when we put premium gas into our
Chevy Cruze it does not perform better
does not get better mileage and does not
reduce emissions in fact it creates more
so we decide to take our test car to
each of the three big gas station chains
to see if they'll recommend premium or
regular first up shell we put in regular
yeah this attendant gives us the correct
advice and when we ask about the premium
v-power no no yes this car don't need to
be power okay
up next its Essos turn which would you
recommend premium or irregular but these
guys
I can't put that maybe on so it's it's
worth it the extra money put me if I
think the motherhood supreme what was it
- that's like you can write like more
mileage on that it's gonna clean they
all you take so clean it good so in goes
the more expensive supreme into a car
that doesn't need it finally we take our
test car to petrol Canada what would you
recommend we put in what kind of gas but
it costs so much more we ask petrol
Canada s oh and shell for on-camera
interviews they decline our offer we
bring our test car to Montreal to meet
the man who represents the oil companies
right yes Tom Harrington from are very
pleased to meet you Carol Montoya is
vice president of the Canadian Fuels
Association wanna start with a simple
question yes should people put premium
gas in a regular car well it's a very
good question one has to look at the
drivers manual it's very clearly spelled
out if you need or not a premium at
premium fuel do the companies that you
represent like shale petrol Canada s so
husky do they tell people to put premium
in their cars absolutely not absolutely
not
we took this Chevy Cruze to three
different gas station chains and we
basically asked that question I show him
video of our test would you make of it
well I mean it stresses the importance
as a driver to make your homework and
understand what your car needs the first
attendant offered regular but why are
they selling people a kind of gas that
they don't need well again I mean what
you say it doesn't need it
the basic requirement for the car is
indeed to put regular gasoline companies
spend millions of dollars in research to
find the best additive what we call
detergents we put in gasoline to keep
cars running cleaner if you do try these
higher premium gasoline and you feel
that your carpet is performing better
you might choose to stay with that
premium gasoline in a regular car that
even in a regular car absolutely we took
this car for a test it did not perform
any better it did not burn cleaner it
did not get better mileage putting
Rick premium gas in that car yeah so I'd
explain that well it's a matter of time
as well in terms of an engine becoming
dirty with deposits in cylinders are in
valve it will not be a matter of days or
weeks this would be over a long period
of many months over many years that you
will as a user decide if this new
premium gasoline you're putting in your
car is indeed giving you a better
performance but I'm surprised to hear
you suggest that running premium gas in
a regular car that doesn't need it
will enhance its performance because
there are experts around the world as
tons of research out there that says the
opposite well the problem is that again
you cannot look at it only from our
octane point of view but more with
respect to the additive which are
detergents right now but every gasoline
has detergents in it putting more in
only means there's more detergent
yeah but then then it's up to you as a
user you know like companies are not
putting these millions of dollars into
research to find this best new additive
to put any premium formula of gasoline
just to for the fun of it it is I should
really make money yeah I mean it is
because obviously it's not the same
formula and what this research on our
side is telling us is that it will keep
your engine cleaner with desire
formulation of high-value additives
seems much of that research is hard to
find we do come across a couple of
petrol canada studies claiming it's
premium gas cleans your engine better
than regular but neither study measures
super clean against petrol Canada's own
regular gas which already has extra
detergents in fact one study compares
super-clean to a gas with no detergents
at all no wonder they're super clean
comes out on top how can we make a
decision when the information is
ostensibly skewed because it fits their
agenda yeah like I'm I'm not privy to
this to this research I even look at the
research on the I Ivan look at the
details of the numbers that have come
out of the research but I think at the
end of the day it's not the research
that should decide it's the consumer
with the performance they're getting
with their car again no one is forcing
anyone to buy this premium gasoline but
if they're being misled into thinking
it's doing things that can't do then
yeah they yeah
then you have to try it been there done
that says Karuna brandy no I'm driving
my car knowing it has premium gas in it
wondering if my emissions are higher
than if I was driving my car with
regular gas after our test results she's
seen the light could you fill it with
regular shoes one driver making peace
with the world now I have this like
awakened consciousness about what kind
of gas to buy
so the next time you visit the premium
pump you might ask yourself are you
doing your car a favor or the oil
companies
[Music]
[Applause]